Let's discuss your career
options and growth as an SEO. SEO is a career choice
that continues to grow, and become more and more established within the
marketing industry. In fact, it is now considered a core skillset for
marketers to have, so even if you're not planning on being the SEO of a team, having SEO knowledge
is a great benefit. For more information,
I've provided a link to a post I
wrote on the subject. SEO is unique in that, it is a specialist role, but in order to
effectively practice SEO, one needs to wear
multiple hats that allow them to both develop
holistic SEO strategies, and communicate those
strategies to clients, and, or internal departments. SEO is a role that benefits in knowledge of complementary
marketing disciplines, it also works well by
complementing other roles. Other roles it
complements include, content marketing,
social media, CROS, or conversion rate
optimization specialists, user experience
specialists, PR, and more. There are many career
options for an SEO, for example, you can
work as a consultant, as part of an agency
selling marketing services, as part of a business, which is known as in-house SEO, and from there you could
work for a small business, a startup, or even larger corporate, or
enterprise-level clients. I've had the privilege of working both consultant, agency, and in-house, and I write about these experiences
frequently on my blog. With all of these career options, you may also be working alongside other SEO teams, for example, when working in-house,
it's not uncommon to work alongside an agency
or an SEO consultant. This is especially true for larger corporations,
generally, outside SEOs may be
brought in for things like specific technical
or platform expertise, or helping to scale an
existing SEO's strategy, such as a link building, or content marketing strategy. They can be brought in for a number of specific situations, so whether you're
an in-house SEO, consultant, or agency side, it's a good idea to
understand the role of SEO in areas outside of your own. This will help you to work
alongside them if necessary. Regardless of your career path, you will need to be able to
effectively do the following. Relate your recommendations to company objectives and goals. Effectively estimate the
value individual SEO effort you can provide the company. Be ready and able to back up your
recommendations with data, past case studies, or more, and prioritize
effectively, so when you have to choose between implementing two major
recommendations, you can do so quickly and easily. In all of these areas, you will need a specific set of skills that will
help you succeed. I urge you to review SEO job listings and see
what roles are hiring, and what skills they both explicitly and
implicitly request. Some skills you will find useful are interpersonal skills, project management and planning, having the ability to
think strategically, being agile and proactive, being able to stay updated
on industry trends and news, and the ability to analyze data, and draw conclusions from it. It might be important to discuss some interview tips, well, this may not apply
to consultants, pretty much every
SEO at some point or another will need to
interview for a job. Here are some tips on
acing the interview. Number 1 tip, you should
have a portfolio prepared. This will help highlight
your past work, and allow you to showcase
your practical experience. Even if this course is
your first experience, doing any type of rescue, completing the exercises
will help you build a portfolio and have examples
of work that you've done, and experience that you have. Number 2, reference specific
and relevant examples. During the interview, the
interview will explain how the SEO role at the
particular company will function, and some specific
challenges they are facing, if they don't, be sure to ask. When they do talk about this, try to find an opportunity to take the challenges they face, and provide solutions based on past work you have done that
has seen positive results. If you don't have specific
experience in that area, but know a great opportunity based on theoretical knowledge, for example, be sure to bring up what you would suggest
doing in that case. Make sure to ask
questions that help you understand the needs
of the company, and where SEO will fit
within their organization, uncovering these needs will
help you determine if one, the role is right
for you, and if so, how you can best support the company in
meeting their goals. I've provided some example
questions you can ask here. Last but not least, make sure to practice ahead
of time with the friend. It helps to practice
thinking on your feet rather than trying to memorize a list
of questions and answers. This will often come off as
rehearsed and not genuine. I'd like to leave you with
a word of caution, in SEO, it is not at all uncommon
for businesses to ask you to do a case study prior to moving on an
interview process. However, I want to caution
you to be wary of companies requesting case
studies that involve an unusual amount
of time and effort. While it is not uncommon to request a small amount of work as proof that you can
perform the tasks required, there are some more shady job ads out there that basically use the interview process as an opportunity to get a lot
of free work from SEOs. To avoid situations like this, I recommend that you be cautious of jobs on free posting sites, jobs posted on sites like
LinkedIn, for example, tend to be more trustworthy, but this doesn't mean
they're always trustworthy, so still be cautious. Next, it's a good idea to
look up the company profile, and just make sure that
they're a legitimate company. Also, you can read reviews
on sites like Glassdoor, and you can read reviews, especially around the
interview process, so take some time
going through those, and seeing if you've
seen complaints of really lengthy
interview process, or the interview
requesting a lot of work. Remember though, that just because you did do a case study, and perhaps didn't get extended a job offer doesn't
mean it was a scam, but if it was an extensive
and time-consuming request, and you didn't hear back, you should make an effort
to note this on sites like Glassdoor so you can help call out companies that do this, and help alert other
potential job interviewers of what might be down
the road for them.